so in the previous two videos we
tackled what methods where and how to
actually put them to use in your program
code so it's now time to talk about
method overloading now method overloading
is very commonly used in Java
programming and actually and other
programming languages and it's the
option where you use the same method name but
with different parameters so as an
example we gonna type in some code to
show you what this looks like and how
you go about it so let's start by
creating a method I'm gonna call this method
calculate score and we are going to type it...
..and we are gonna have 2 parameters the first is the player name...
...the second parameter is gonna be score
which is an integer I'm going to type..
...
...which
is an arbitrary number which were not
going to use anymore we've just done that so
we can return something that's
because we have defined the method to
return an integer so to confirm
that runs we can actually type the name
of the method as you've seen before...
....
....and if we run this
we should find that we get it to work we see over here
player Tim scored five hundred
points and if we wanted to we could take
the value that's return because that's what
return does it actually returns whatever
the amount is back to in this case up here
on line 6 we could change that if you want to
to put new score....because you can see on line 12 we
multiplied score by a thousand and we can
print that out as well....
..run that to confirm
that works new score is 500,000 which of course is 500
we pass times a thousand is five hundred
thousand that's how you use a value that
you've calculated in a method and
returned it and from the process that we
actually called the method you can then
use that value for some sort of
calculations if you want to so nothing
particularly unique their we've seen that
similarly setup used in the
past
ok so lets go about overloading the method now I may have said
overriding early in the video but just
to be clear this is overloading methods
so overriding is got a completely
different meaning and we'll be talking
about overriding later in the course
but this is overloading methods which is
basically using the same method name but
with a variable number different number
of parameters so we start off by
creating a second one and I'll copy
the method and paste it now notice when I do that
first of all we get an error and it
says calculate score and note
the string comma int on screen is already
defined so that;s Java telling you look
you can't use an identical method with an
identical number of parameters that is the
problem there
so the option to fix this well the first option would be to put an s to make it a different method name and of
course that will work but that's then a
separate method were not actually
overloading the method we are using or creating
a new method so in this case we don't wanna
do that so the way we do is we change the
number of parameters so I can get rid of the first
parameter make it so that this method
now has only got one parameter which is
the score and notice that the error went away but we got an error now on line 17 because we're trying
to access variable the perimeter that
no longer exists in this particular method I'm
going to put...
....now notice there are 2 methods their now
and the warning on the
screen now because it's greyed
the method name compared to the one
on line 11 is saying that that's never
been used before so that is IntelliJ saying
by the way you've created this
overloaded method called calculate score
but you're not using that particular
you're only using this first one which
is in the brighter color you can see
that we're using that online 6 so we
can still run that and get the same results we got
prior to overloading the method but
to actually use the second method what we need to do
is we need to type it now notice when I started typing
IntelliJ now shows us that we've got
two methods here and we can select which
one we want so if I select the top one with
a single parameter press enter their noting
that theirs two options on the screen
now IntelliJ is sort of saying there is 2 ways
you can access these methods you
can even use the first one in which case
I need a player name and a score or I can
use the second one in which case I only need
a score so I'm going to use the second one and
just type in a value like 75 and you
can see that that's valid and that's now
going to call that second method if we
run it so run it to make sure it does work unnamed player
scored 75 points which is clearly the
code from the second method now Java is checking so
we can actually do something like
calculate score and put...we actually get an error and the error
that's coming up is saying is the first or
is the wrong first argument found int
requires string so what
IntelliJ is saying there is well ok if
you want to call this overloaded method with two
parameters I know that you calculate it
and set up one on line 13 but that needs to
be a string
so that's what its complaining about if we added a third
parameter and just sort of says altogether while
hang on a minute you haven't actually
created an overloaded method with three
parameters of int and notice that it's
actually saying int,int,int
and the point toward that is
that what makes it unique is the data
typed
in the parameters so its not what you've
typed in for the parameter name that can
be literally anything you want that's no
problems
the thing you need to keep to get the
same to or what Java uses to determine
whether it's in equal or not is this the data type in this
case the string and the int ok so lets
do one more lets try and create a method that has got no
parameters that's a third one and at the
moment that is coming up and that says can't resolved method and that is just as in
the case if you made a typo creating a
new method this is now saying well hang on you haven't got a method with that name so lets
now try and create another overloaded method
with no parameters and the way we  will do that
is we get rid of the parameters and will put...
...we can't return anything because we can't calculate anything because we don't have a score to work with and that is now valid and we can
actually run that so we run that now you
can see we've got all three methods working
on their and all got separate output you can see
that output working quite nicely on
the screen so what we're trying to do
here
when overloading a method we need to create a
unique method signature so the signature
is essentially here is the the unique
part is the actual method name you can
see that's the same in all three cases
here but it's also in the parameters then you
might think that you could change
something like here you could say ok let's create another
method calculate score and I'm going to copy and paste that but let's make it a
different return type or make it maybe a void
instead of an int....because there is no return there becaise
it is a void so you might think we can do that by
changing the return type does that make
it unique but the error we are going to get here says calculate score is already defined and
what Java is telling you is just changing
the data type of the return type the
type of data that's going to be returned from
the method doesn't change the overall
signature so you do need to change the
number of parameters their to make it
unique
so I'll just delete that line again ok so that is how
overloading a methods work so what I'm
gonna do now is issue a challenge to
get you to do some overloading of your own so
I'm gonna paste in what the challenge is and then we're I'm going to get you to go away and have a go at doing it
and then ultimately I actually do it on
screen for you as well
so lets paste that up here so here what needs to be done so we need to
create a method called calcFeetandInchesToCentimeters
and that needs to
accept two parameters first parameter is
feet and the second one is inches
the second parameter both should be of type
double I mentioned towards the bottom of
this section in the hints area to use doubles
for your data types thats
best way to calculate here but I also wanna show
you or get you to do some validation in other
words you want to confirm that the data
we working with is valid so you need to
first check the first parameter feet is
greater than and equal to 0 so long
as the number is 0 or higher
we're going to say that that's a valid
number we can work it in other words we're not going to accept
numbers that are less than 0 and for
inches
the second parameter you wanna make sure
that its greater than or equal to zero
and then it's also less than or
equal to 12 which is a valid range of
inches when you're looking at feet inches
together
know if you find that either of those
conditions fail in other words if feet
is less than zero or inches is less than
0 and inches is greater than 12
sort of outside that range in other words you
want to return negative -1 for both of those scenarios
but if the parameters are valid in other
words we got a valid feet parameter and valid
inched and we have validated within the range
we want to work with at that point I wan't
you to calculate how many centimeters sentiment prior to feet and inches pass this method so
you need to take the feet and inches
convert them to centimeters and actually
return that value back to the method
that's calling it and also printed it out on
the screen now for the second method
where we are gonna overload this first methods so its gonna be
obviously the same name but one parameter and the parameter
is inches so we need to validate it
again and in this case you only want to
validate that is grater equal to 0
unlike the first method in this one we want
to actually accepted an inches
parameter that can literally be any number so we
can accept 50 inches or a 100 inches and you still
need to then converted to centimeters so you need to figure out how to convert that
back to feet and inches so that you can
call our first method which is got the
feet and inches parameters so you need
to figure out how to do so that's the
tricky part is working out how to do
that but then also calling that first
method that we created so we are actually making
sure that your calling the right method so your calling one
overloaded method from another overloaded method
if that makes sense and in terms
of hints as I mentioned use double for
your numbers data types for your number data types
that's a good idea here 1 inch is equals
2.54 centimeters you need to know that
in terms of calculation and if you don't
know 1 foot is 12 inches and you need
to know that also when your doing conversions
to and from inches, feet, etc now I'm going to show a
link on the screen shortly and this will
show this is just a website that you can
go to, to verify the your numbers are working
and from there you can confirm that your
code is working and just secondly
recalling another overloaded method as
you saw earlier in this video just
really required you to use the right number of
parameters and and Java will do the rest so
keep that in mind when you determining
how to call one overloaded method from another so lets look at
this website before I pause and let you go away and
create your version of the code so there is the
website on the screen and there will be
link in the Resources section so we
could type something like..
and that 182.8800 centimeters so you just
type in either the number of feet or number
feet inches or just inches and this
will tell what the centimeter is are and from
there you can confirm that your code is
correct and working properly
ok so that's so pause the video now
go away and complete the challenge and when you
done you want to come back and see what
I've done come back and I'll show you my
solution pause the video now...
..I hope you've had some success and managed to get it
working so lets now go through and try and
solve this so what we gonna do first....
...let's create our first
method so its going to be...
.....
...and we got the double to return because we are going to ultimately return the number of
centimeters
so what we need to do is some validation
so we need to make sure that feet is
greater than equal to 0 we need to make sure
that inches is in the range of being
zero or greater but less than or equal to 12
I'm going to use some if logic and also
used the ampersand as well to chain together some and conditions to do all
checking on one line we're gonna put...and actually we will just use an OR instead so....
.....
...so that's
our validation so we are saying if
feet is less than 0 and we determined up here its less than zero
it's invalid so we don't want to do anymore
processing or remembering the 2 pipe
characters are or if the inches is
less than 0 and the inches greater than 12
so both of those have to succeed in
that case so inches has to be less
than zero and greater than 12 so its outside
the range of both of those scenarios
we are going to return -1 that means we are going to do normal
processing but if we continue on down here
we know that return -1 if that is the case its not going to come down here
and do any more processing for us so at this
point we can get to line 44 and 49 that we've
got valid parameters
lets do some calculations so put...so we need to start figuring this out so lets
convert the feet component to cm
first to do that we are gonna put...
why 12 well 12 is the number of inches in
a foot
multiplying by 12 and then multiply by
2.54 which we determined up here on
line 32 was the calculation to convert and inch to a cm
we've now converted the total feet
that was pass to this method to cm now that
still leaves the second parameter inches
we need to separately convert that and
add it to our total so to do that
we are going to type...
so we're going to take the existing value that we
calculated on line 44 and to that we
are gonna add inches.....so we've got centimeters to be
has been correctly calculated for
both feet and inches so from that point we can then print a message...
....
...lets go ahead and
run that now we will have a bit of a
discussion about negative one because I haven't actually mentioned why you'd be
returning -1 so lets run this this actually before we run it what we need call it because this is telling us by the
way that ok you have defined a method but
you've never used it so lets
put an example and lets put....and lets start with 6 and 0, 6 feet and 0 inches
because we did that before and just as a
refresher we determined that was 182.8800
that should be the number that we're looking
for we run that 6 feet and 0 inches we got 182.880
so that's good
we got the calculations correct let's just try one
more lets try 7 foot and 5 inches
run that 226.06cm and go back to the site and make this 7 foot and 5 inches
226.06 226.06 so clearly
that's working the other thing we can
try and do here is let's try and put a negative one and one it should get an error their if we run that just a bit
confusing I won't make it -1 lets make it -10
run that now notice we haven't got a message at all in
other words what's happening is this
code here has been fulfilled so what I might do is put...
...lets do that so we know it has error ed and trying
to return we know that the parameter is invalid
invalid feet or inches parameters
so that's good and just to make a test there we
should be able to put
up here we will pass a parameter of 0 just to make
sure that does actually work 0 feet 1 inches equals
2.54 centimeters that's good so it still
accepted 0 which wanted to do so likewise for
inches now let's try...
lets try negative 10 inches which would give us an error and we got an error there and why did we get the error
there so we should have a test here to check
whether inches is out of range and for some
reason that's is still working
lets have a look at the code so if we got feet is less than 0 or inches is less than 0 and that AND is
wrong so the AND should be an OR so we got 2 parts here this is where it
gets a bit confusing but you need to look
at the brackets but I've got an AND and the course
inches can't be less than 0 and greater than
12 it can only be one or the other
therefore we want to test to see whether
inches less than 0 or its greater than
12 so lets run that again
Invalid feet or inches parameter which is
correct now and let's try and the value 13
in their run that Invalid which is good but lets just a put a valid range 6 foot 0
6 feet and 0 inches its giving us the correct value so our validation was
slightly wrong there and this is why
testing can be a good idea sometimes
just to make sure you got your values
correct
now the reason I'm returning -1 here this is a good way to test
for validation to check whether your
calculations are correct and what you could
do here is ultimately you can have something
like..
.....
lets run that that hasn't come up and
that's because the data we got returned was
cm which is greater than 0
so that's correct but if we changed this
to an invalid number again 13 invalid parameters you can see there so
that's just a way of checking your
parameters and -1 is
something that's commonly returned if
there is a fault if there is actually a
problem with your code and you can
test for that like you I've done here
if its is less than 0.0 what
I could have done an equals test to see whether equals
one to print an error message so that's why I've
use -1
ok this video is getting quite long so lets see if we can finish of the second method and end it
what I'm going to do for the 2nd method is going to copy
just the first line and it can be a good
idea to do this to copy just the
first line to make sure that you haven't
made a typo because obviously overloading a method relies on you typing the
method name correctly so if you're not
typing it correctly your going to get a
new method instead of overloading a method so at the moment that's complaining because
we've got another method of the same
number of parameters bet lets changes that now
so its just got inches as you recall the second method only accepts
inches and a validation is that its
greater than equal to 0 so much easier so our
validation should just be....
....so that's our only
options to check whether it's less than
0 then its an error so now what we need to
do is we got an inches parameter but we need to call the overloaded
method on line 43 and that needs to pass
the feet and inches so we need to
convert the inches to feet and inches
if you know what I mean so we need to
extract first the number of feet that are in
inches then whatever the remainder is
the number of inches that forms part of the 2nd parameter so to
do that I'm gonna type...
..I'm going to use int here and that make sure
that its converted to a whole number...so where
as we didn't used multiplied by 12 on
line 50 in this case we are dividing it by the
inches by 12 to get the
numbers feet and then that's the first
parameter that we are going to use and the second one
is going to be inches so I'm going to call...and we are going to use the remainder operator for that so that way
we can go about doing that is put...
...so basically again as you saw
in the previous video using the remainder operator
it takes whatever you've typed as
a number
divides that total number by that and
gives a reminder in this case what we're doing
is we're basically dividing the inches parameter
by 12 and whatever is left over from
that is going to be put into our
remaining inches and we doing that
obviously to get just the remaining
inches after the feet has been calculated
once you're done we can
output it so lets do some output and its going to be...
.....
...so we are going to call first one we are going to pass 2 parameters
which are feet and inches you can see that I've
killed two birds with one stone there so
to speak by returning and calling the
method at the same time so the return is gonna
get whatever the calculation is from
calling that method up here so we're
actually passing the feet and inches to
it so you can calculate and it's going
to return that value ultimately to up here
and we're going to call it so we are gonna do now is gonna type...
....note that there is 2 options there because it is a overloaded method we are gonna go with the first one which is
passing a hundred so run that
and see if it works you can see what I have done here so what I've actually done
is I pass the wrong parameter so your wondering why is this coming up
saying invalid feet or inches parameters what I've done is I've pass the
second parameter as
inches where inches was a 100 we called the
second method the second overloaded
method with a parameter of a 100 and I have accidentally type it in here
as the parameter to call this
first method so what that should have been of
course was remaining inches so just go ahead and
try again now we correctly got 8 feet 4 inches
254 centimeters let's check that so 8 feet and 4 inches 254 cm so
that's correct and just for kicks lets
do one more let's make this 156
run again 13 feet and 0 inches that's funny I got it exact lets try 157 I just
wanna see that it's working correctly and run
that here we go 13 feet 1 inches lets try
that 13 feet 1 inch is 398.78 centimeters 398.78cm
but we are only looking at the first couple of
decimal points up to there and you can see that's clearly
correct that's our code working and the last thing to check will be our
validation
we are gonna put a -10 there just to make sure that
it works or if it doesn't work if its
invalid we got no data back whatsoever that's because we've got this code in here saying if inches is less than 0 return -1
we haven't got anything out putting here
on line 15 which is why we haven't got a
message I'll put that back to what it
was and run it one last time so that's it that's my
solution so hopefully you enjoy that and
got a lot out of it now method overloading
is something that you will see a lot of
in Java code its very commonly used and
although this particular example is a
bit contrived because it's probably
gonna be rare that you ever need to
know that a hundred inches converted to
decimal is or actually 157 which we have established very
rare that you need to know that a
157 inches is equal to
13 feet and one-inch but this was just an
example more showing how to use method
overloading in practice when you're
out there producing rules for production Java code
you find overloaded methods
are indeed very common that's it i hope
you've enjoyed that and got a lot out of it
and I'll see you in the next video